[Music]
what is a good explanation
every day we want to know why what is
happening around us is happening we may
be at the supermarket and now for three
weeks in a row the price of milk has
increased we don't want to be just told
that we should expect tomorrow it will
be more expensive still or that this is
the trend the government now predicts we
want to know why and if anyone does try
to provide us with a prediction that
milk will be one dollar a carton more
expensive this time next year we want to
know how it is that they arrived at that
conclusion what do they know about the
causes of price increases if each week
the local sports club sells 1 000 raffle
tickets for a top prize of 500
and each week the club manager wins the
prize it's no comfort to anyone at all
if everyone can reliably predict that
next time the raffle is held the tickets
are sold that the manager will once
again be announced as the winner no one
cares about that prediction people want
to know why they have their suspicions
that somehow somewhere cheating is going
on but they want an explanation a good
explanation it could be that the manager
himself is corrupt and he's cheating the
system but before anyone can properly
conclude that we need evidence to rule
out whether somebody might have a
vendetta against the manager wanting to
make him look bad so when video
surveillance footage of the assistant
manager disposing of the tickets sold
into a rubbish bin the only viable
explanation left accounting for all the
parts of the problem we had before is
that the assistant manager was the
corrupt one now that the evidence in the
form of video surveillance footage that
no one disputes the validity of has
ruled out all the other explanations in
favor of the assistant manager is the
cause of the pattern of winds all the
other explanations are by comparison bad
explanations the explanation that the
manager did it is a bad explanation
because it's false it solves no problems
but the explanation someone did it
although true it's a bad explanation
because it's easy to vary it's true that
someone did it we might even say someone
identical to the assistant manager and
who now has assumed their identity or
perhaps it's their hitherto unknown
identical twin the non-explanation that
someone did it is a bad explanation but
it might actually be better than no
explanation at all for a person who
thinks that the reason for the manager's
streak of winds was literal supernatural
luck that exists in the universe and
which tends to shine on the manager to
the exclusion of all others no there is
no such supernatural luck force someone
did it and that someone was the
assistant manager and now that he has
been caught we can predict that next
week the chance of the assistant manager
winning the raffle is no higher than
that of anyone else the pattern which
existed in the past is predicted or
postdicted by the explanation we now
have in hand the existence of which the
existence of this explanation is part of
the reason why the trend will now fail
to continue philosophers have debated
the purpose of knowledge creation for
millennia especially when it comes to
knowledge of the physical world which we
call science some have argued that the
only purpose we have for doing science
is to make predictions because we have
no hope of ever coming to actually have
certainty about what exists out there in
physical reality perhaps we are dreaming
or living in a simulation of some kind
we can never rule out being deceived in
such ways so the best we can hope for is
that the illusions we may be
experiencing have some regular character
in other words perhaps we can at least
predict what might happen from one
moment to the next but these concerns
are not concerns about whether or not we
can create explanations about the world
that we can improve but rather they are
concerns about whether we can have
absolute inherent certainty about our
claims these philosophers are right to
conclude we cannot be certain that we
could always be deceived and so the
search for absolute final truth is a
fool's errand but what they are wrong
about is the further claim that
therefore any such attempt to create
genuine objective knowledge is pointless
it is not precisely because knowledge
cannot be about certainty which is a
feeling anyway and it cannot be about
final truth because there is no means by
which we could ever hope to justify or
prove beyond all doubt that we have
found the truth instead
knowledge is about finding solutions to
our problems our problems are real and
the solutions we try out either work or
they do not and all of this is an
entirely objective process independent
of the subjective feelings of anyone or
what our beliefs in the ultimate true
nature of reality is in any final sense
a good explanation is a solution to a
problem indeed when it comes to
scientific theories
those good explanations are solutions to
many problems and some of the problems
that are solved include predicting what
will would or could happen under certain
conditions and many of the solutions
provided by a good scientific
explanation will be solutions for
problems the theories create or never
imagined that is something we call the
reach of an explanation
the idea that a theory which captures
something true about the world can make
universal claims that apply at many
different times in many different places
and thus form the basis for the solving
of problems far from whatever situation
initiated that original quest for a good
explanation when philosophers and
scientists in the early 1800s guessed
that there was a relationship between
electricity and magnetism it took
experiments by danish physicist hans
christian orstedt to demonstrate that
indeed a current carrying wire could
affect a compass needle but neither he
nor michael faraday who took up this
mantle and showed that the relationship
could be harnessed in two ways the
electrical generator and the electrical
motor neither of them could possibly
have guessed what problems their
solution that today we call
electromagnetism would solve whether or
not faraday actually ever said to a
politician who questioned him about the
point of his experiments into
electricity that sir one day you may tax
it the point remains for all his
brilliance faraday could not have
imagined the world we have today shaped
by his work on generators and motors
from his laboratory in london england in
1831 faraday's explanation of how
changing electric currents can generate
magnetic fields and vice versa reaches
out across time and space to places like
austin texas where improved electric
motors continue to be designed for tesla
cars today that is some genuine reach
and the fundamental means by which the
kinetic energy of motion in the wheels
is generated from the chemical energy
stored in the battery and that
explanation is essentially unchanged
since faraday it is an electric current
that produces the repulsive force on
magnets causing the torque the engine
produces all those parts of the
explanation chiefly how electricity
generates a magnetic field is very hard
to vary no other physical process can be
substituted for that one gravity cannot
be substituted for magnetism and nuclear
reactions cannot be substituted for
electricity the hard to vary aspects of
the inner workings of any electric motor
however simple or sophisticated are
united by an underlying good explanation
ultimately expressed in what are now
known as maxwell's equations including
the one named after faraday himself
faraday's law all electrical generators
that rely on a turbine which is the
overwhelming majority of electrical
generation from hydroelectricity through
to wind turbines and nuclear power
generators and coal or gas-fired power
stations all of them rely on these good
explanations whose genesis can be found
in the 1831 london laboratory of michael
faraday and upon the 1860 desk of james
clark maxwell they were solving problems
of that day idiosyncrasies some may have
thought of the time curiosities
generating electrical sparks and
magnetic effects but the bright lights
of a city in the 21st century electric
cars racing along highways and portable
supercomputers carried by almost every
person on earth were not something that
any of the scientists working in the
1800s had in the front of their minds
and yet the problem of how to brighten
cities at night or transport people
faster and more efficiently or allow
everyone to be interconnected on the
globe was solved in a real way only
because they explained what they did
good explanations are hard to come by
because every part of the explanation
must have a functional role that cannot
be easily swapped out for any other
phenomena the good explanation that
solves the question of what matter is
made out of consists of our
understanding of particle physics it
postulates the existence of electrons in
orbit around nuclei that are themselves
composed of protons and neutrons
themselves made out of particles smaller
still called quarks each of these
particles mentioned have properties like
mass and electric charge that can be
measured this in part is what makes that
theory testable
and good explanations are improvable we
can reasonably ask what electrons are
made of for now our answer is they're
not made of anything they are
fundamental excitations of a field but
they are not protons they cannot be
easily varied this stands in stark
contrast to mythology where events are
explained in terms of the whimsical and
arbitrary actions of supernatural beings
while our scientific explanation of the
cause of thunder is lightening itself a
consequence of a stream of electrons
leaping like a huge spark from the
ground to the clouds or vice versa a
mythological account might have the
norse god thor or the greek god zeus or
the anger of any god or goddess one
might care to invent none of this is
truly explanatory because any postulated
god is easily varied for another on the
other hand the stream of electrons
explanation for lightening is hard to
vary and its hard to vary character is
in part due to its testability in this
case that is because we can indeed
measure the charge on a bolt of
lightning and find it is what we call
negative which is the same as the
charges carried by electrons in orbit
around atoms and opposite to that
carried by protons which are found for
example in alpha radiation that we can
go out into the world and compare what
our explanation says with what actually
goes on in physical reality makes that
explanation especially hard to vary for
if we do vary it and the test turns out
to refute our new explanation then our
explanation ceases to be an explanation
of that phenomena it fails to account
for what we
thought it would but good explanations
are not confined to science there exists
good explanations in history the reason
why north koreans today remain under
communist rule while south koreans enjoy
free trade is not because the north
voted that way and allowed the
capitalists to all migrate south it is
rather that the united states with the
agreement of the soviet union divided
the korean peninsula in half along the
38th north parallel line of latitude
such that the soviet union de facto
controlled the north and the united
states controlled the south all those
parts of the explanation the ussr the
usa the 38th parallel explain the
political and economic division that
exists on the korean peninsula and the
historic events ever since and morally
we can see an explanation that liberty
especially when it comes to trade is the
underlying explanation for why it is
that nations that tend towards communism
have a far larger proportion of their
citizens in poverty as compared to
nations where those citizens are free to
trade one with another and indeed the
citizens of other nations we can look to
history for demonstrations of this and
we can argue from first principles that
coercion is always and everywhere it is
practiced antithetical to progress and
prosperity but in this case we should
not want to further test such a theory
one might have a good explanation that
coercion leads to suffering and
persistent wide scale suffering causes
depression and poverty but to test such
a claim would itself be a moral failing
for to test whether some amount of
suffering or deprivation causes
depression and poverty would mean
causing suffering and deprivation in the
first place we can have good
explanations of our moral and economic
stances without ever needing to test
them
in these cases we do not need any
further so-called empirical data or any
carefully controlled experiment we argue
on principle that liberty is necessary
for progress and problem solving we do
not need to further deprive people of
liberty in order to carefully control
our test of whether it really is the
case that a lack of liberty leads to
worse outcomes in general for people
indeed here we can see that prediction
cannot be the point of our good
explanations for if there exists a
debate about whether we can predict an
imprisoned person will be more
industrious than a person with liberty
what settles the matter cannot be a
direct comparison it does not matter
whether we predict more or less
industriousness because the net worth of
a person is not measured against the
quantity of work they do a person is not
a machine whose value is couched in
terms of the number of widgets it can
assemble per hour each person is
different so even if one person or 100
people were by some metric more
industrious when imprisoned it would be
morally abhorrent to turn that claim
into a rule for all because people are
widely different one from another unlike
machines which might all be manufactured
to the same standards fundamentally a
person has intrinsic value and creates
new kinds of value and what maximizes
that will be a very individual thing
indeed much of our work is mysterious
how can we improve the flourishing of
everyone how can we increase wealth cure
disease understand the deeper nature of
matter energy time and space
each time we solve a problem through an
explanation of the world new windows
open up revealing what we did not
realize we did not even know before
when rutherford geiger and marsden fired
alpha particles helium nuclei at a thin
film of gold leaf they found to their
surprise that the structure of the atom
consisted of a tiny dense nucleus with
the rest of the volume of the atom being
mostly empty space but if that was the
case it raised new questions of how the
particles were distributed in that
nucleus and throughout the empty space
if at all and we could then go on to ask
whether that nucleus was composed of
other particles that were even smaller
only then could some questions even be
posed properly now that we had some more
answers
the quest for further good explanations
never ends it only accelerates as each
new explanation never ends in a
cul-de-sac but rather reveals more
avenues down which to go david deutsch
speaks of the purpose of knowledge
creation as being like understanding a
conjuring trick if we are watching the
apparent soaring in half of a person on
the stage we can reliably predict
that each and every time by the end of
the performance the assistant to the
magician will appear fully intact legs
and all but that prediction is not
understanding to understand how the
trick works we can reject any
explanation in terms of it being actual
magic the conjurer actually did
something but what well the assistant is
very flexible and that box they are in
it's far larger than it appears and
those legs they weren't really hers
after all there were three people on
that stage not two the magician and his
two assistants though you only ever see
the face and the torso of one of them
the knowledge that there really are
three people there is a good explanation
of what has gone on our attempts to
understand our world are like attempts
to understand conjuring tricks
science and history and all of our ways
of explaining what is happening are
attempts to do away with mere
predictions and appeals to the
supernatural we want to understand the
mechanism how it works what the causes
are and account precisely for what is
going on in the world once we have that
account that's good hard to vary
explanation only then can we begin to
make any valid predictions although
rather often our best explanation might
even rule out the possibility of a
prediction consider that our best
explanation of the evolution of a star
like the sun has it that a vast cloud of
hydrogen and helium gas and cosmic dust
which is basically everything else
except the hydrogen helium it collapsed
condensed and then coalesced into a
sphere where in its core nuclear
reactions initiated and began at a
certain rate that barely changes over
time given these rates of reaction and
given the mass of the sun it can be
estimated that the fuel sufficient for
another 5 billion years or so of fusion
reactions can continue at this time
typically so our astrophysics tells us
the sun will expand into a red giant
star it may or may not expand to engulf
the earth itself but so it is said
regardless of this the oceans will boil
away as the surface of the sun
approaches our planet and the disk of
the sun comes to fill our sky but is
that genuinely a prediction in the case
of our sun
it rests upon our best known
astrophysics explanation but it ignores
a crucial thing it ignores the choices
wealth and power of people a billion or
five billion years hence it may well be
the case that we can routinely control
the rate of reactions in stars by then
or it may be that we decide to move the
earth out of its orbit or any of
countless other things we might decide
to do which make the claim the oceans
will boil away false and if that claim
is false then the explanation cannot
have been a good one in retrospect when
applied to our sun any prediction about
what might happen billions of years
hence where the knowledge that people
are creating could have an effect
is prophecy a prediction made in the
absence of a good explanation is a
prophecy a good explanation identifies
and then eliminates error how can we
possibly guess what people might do
tomorrow let alone a billion years hence
the free choice of a person is part of
distant good explanations and it is a
variable that can never be controlled by
definition and thus is forever beyond
science to predict but this is not a
problem for the process of science it is
only a problem for the prophets who seek
to apply science to problems which are
not in the main scientific our good
explanations of the world include the
scientific but are also far more broad
than this importantly a good explanation
of what good explanations are and what
the limits of science are are not
scientific matters they are matters of
epistemology and philosophy they are
explanations of why science works and
what reason is and how all of this
allows for unbounded progress which is
inherently unpredictable our best
explanations are hard to vary but this
does not mean they are set in stone they
can be refuted overturned and improved
so the quest for good explanations goes
on forever it is the way we solve our
problems it is the way we improve
ourselves and everyone else and in a
very real sense the quest for good
explanations is not only what transforms
the world and transforms us it is our
reason for being we are the universe
explaining itself
[Music]
you